---
title: About
permalink: "/about/"
layout: default
---

<h1 class="mt-3">About</h1>
<hr>

### CIS 427 final project.
For my final project, I decided to make a webstore using open source technology, and Software as a Service (SaaS) tools. The website itself is an onlinse retail store where buyers can purchase music in the form of cassette tapes, CD's, and vinyl. Inspiration for the project came from a conversation with a friend of mine about a year ago where he was talking about how static sites are all fun and games until you need some database activity. I enjoy making static websites. This propject is a static website. That conversation lingered with me for a very long time until one day, I decided to find out how to make a static site more dynamic. This lead me to various <a href='https://searchcloudcomputing.techtarget.com/definition/Software-as-a-Service' target="_blank">Software as a Service</a> tools such as Content Management Systems, Hosting, E-Commerce, and much more! I even found a service for <a href='https://likebtn.com/en/'>like buttons</a>. In the end, I was able to prove to myself that static sites can be dynamic with the right tools.

#### Front-End and Build tools
For the front-end, I used <a href='https://jekyllrb.com/' target="_blank">Jekyll</a> to actually create the site, <a href='https://getbootstrap.com/' target="_blank">Bootstrap</a> for quick styling, and <a href='https://fontawesome.com/' target="_blank">Font Awesome</a> for icons. 

Jekyll was developed by one of the creators of GitHub and is one of the most popular static site generators. It is (kind of) a <a href='https://www.cmscritic.com/flat-file-cms/' target="_blank">flat file CMS</a>, meaing that instead of storing data and content in a database, it is instead stored on a file, and when the site is built (compiled), contents in the file get turned into HTML. The benefit of this is that since there is no database to query, load times are faster. Plus, there nothing to compromise. So there's some built in security. 

Bootstrap is a CSS framework developed by Twitter and is one of the most used and successful design frameworks to date. It was used for this project because of how quick elements on the page can be styled. Bootstrap comes with a CSS reset file, the popular javascript library <a href='https://jquery.com/' target="_blank">jQery</a>, and the original <a href='https://sass-lang.com/' target="_blank">Sass</a> stylesheet and components. Font Awesome is a icon library. For this site, I am using the free icons, however, there is a license that can be purchased for other icons. Bootstrap and Font Awesome were used for rapid development, which cut down on figuring out to style the site, and creating additional graphics. 

#### Shopping Cart
This site is a retail-like store where people are able to purchase music in the formats of cassettes, CD's, and vinyl. For this functionality, the SaaS program <a href='https://snipcart.com/' target="_blank">Snipcart</a> was used. With a myriad of shopping cart solutions to choose from, I chose Snipcart because 1) it integrates well with static websites 2) it was easy to set-up 3) it had a plethora of features that work well it other programs 4) it had inventory management and 5) they have their own back-end. So instead of me having to create and maintain some sort of back-end, I can use Snipcarts dashboard to see what items have been sold, manage invoicing, activate various payment gateways, create discount, and so much more. Plus, of all the other options I researched, they were the most cost effective. The shopping cart is fully functional, even though for the sake of this project, it is in test mode. So you can actually buy one of the items in the store (since it is in test mode, you won't be charged for anything. On the payment screen, a dummy credit cart will be displayed).

#### Content Management
Originally, I was wanted to use <a href='https://www.siteleaf.com/' target="_blank">Siteleaf</a> as the content management system. The issue with Siteleaf was that I was not able to edit the root configuration file from the software itself, only the pages that the site generated. So I went with my second option, <a href='https://cloudcannon.com/' target="_blank">Cloudcannon</a>. Cloudcannon offers a lot of the same features that Siteleaf has, except on top of editing the the pages themselves, I can edit and manage all files. It's like having a full text editor in on the computer. Plus, it's all cloud based, so I'm not tied down to a specific computer. All I need is a computer and internet access and I'm ready to edit my site. 

#### Hosting
The site itself is static, so I can theoretically host it anywhere. I chose not to host it through a service like Hostgator or Go Daddy, because I'd be paying for database space that I wouldn't be utilizing. So I instead opted for <a href='https://www.netlify.com/' target="_blank">Netlify</a>. Netlify is another SaaS where web applications can be hosted. Instead of paying a fixed monthly fee, hosting is based on the amount of traffic that is being driven towards the application. The service has a wide variety of features. It utilizes various build tools such as Gulp. It can run Ruby code. It can use Amazon's AWS Lamda functions, and so much more. This hosting service makes it easier for my project to grow if I would like to scale it for a wider audience. Cloudcannon also has a hosting option, but Netlify was more rich in features. 

#### Version Control
After having a variety of projects get lost on personal computers, or corrupted through flash drives, I saved my files through <a href='https://git-scm.com/' target="_blank">Git</a>, and push the code to <a href='https://github.com/' target="_blank">Github</a>. If something happens on my personal computer where my files are deleted fro whatever reason, instead of freaking out, I can manually download the files from my Githum repository, open them up in my text editor, and get to work. Cloudcannon and Netlify are both connected to the repository. Whenever I make a change from Cloudcannon, it pushes the changes to Github. From there, Netlify catches the changes, then rebuilds the site. For me, this is a better system than what I used to do, which was login to the IP address that was provided by the hosting service, then FTP all of the changes (all locally of course).

#### Security
Personally, I didn't have to program any kind of security channels. The biggest concerns that I had when working on this project was having an exposed API key for Snipcart. I was rest assured after contacting the Snipcart team when they told me that the API key really matters when I'm working with their webhooks API. Plus, they have a built in feature where the program checks that the items in my inventory dashboard matches the items on my website, so it's really next to impossible to do anything with the key. 

Without having a database, I don't have to take extra precautions to secure the data. I don't have to working about SQL injections, phishing, or Cross Site Scripts affecting the functionality of the website. 
The one thing that I should make secure is the repository. Github has a paid feature where I can make the repository private, so only authenticated users can access it. 

#### Ideas for the Future
I want to continue using these tools becuase of how great they were to work with. I also want to make complex static sites using the features that Netlify has to offer on top of other tools and APi's that API's that strike my attention. I think this project is a good starting point for that. 